## Solves the current problem

Writing software these days is a complex endeavor. When I say complex, I mean non-deterministic adaptive environments wherein our very participation changes the environment in unpredictable ways.

When I started working in software, we were automating processes that had been around for decades, had been refined, honed, and standardized across industries. We worked on accounting systems, payroll systems, and filing systems. We wrote docketing software for law firms and library management systems for, well, libraries. The audience was small, knew the domain, and could be trained to use the software. Back then, writing software was complicated. The problems we were solving were relatively simple, but there were many paths to a good, acceptable solution. Our job was to take the components of data elements, some logical operators, and simple screens and build something that got the job done. Our job was to assemble the known from a set of requirements.

Today, that is rarely the case. Today, we are not automating the known, we are inventing through automation. We are exploring. We are creating new markets, radically disrupting established markets, and redesigning the economy while we're at it. We don't actually know what is going to happen. We don't know how customers will respond. Sometimes, we don't even know for certain who the customer is. And sometimes, the customer does something we could have never guessed and we've discovered yet a whole new market. The audience is opaque and fickle. They're not interested in being trained, it needs to just work. Our job is not to assemble the known from a set of requirements. Our job is to discover the possible from a set of hypotheses.

{blurb, icon: quote-left}
A step at as time . . . One problem at a time—just figure out this one problem.

C> -- Linda Sue Park
{/blurb}

In a complex environment, we cannot know cause and effect. We cannot predict what will happen. Nor can we, with certainty, look back and say what exactly contributed to a particular outcome. We can guess. We can feel it in our guts. But we cannot know. Repeating the steps, exactly as we recall, will very likely produce a different result.

In 2004, Jeremy Stoppleman and Russel Simmons launched an email recommendation service. Among the features was something called "Real Reviews" where users voluntarily wrote reviews of local businesses. The feature became so popular that they pivoted the company and Yelp, as we now know it, was born.

The Point was a consumer activism site where anyone could create a campaign for social good and invite others to participate. The authors of the site noticed some interesting behavior where a campaign would start, become very active, and then suddenly the activity would stop. Doing some research, they discovered that some users were leveraging the platform for group buying in order to get lower costs. And the idea of Groupon was born.

Ben Silbermann and Paul Sciarra partnered up to launch Tote, a mobile app for shopping and sharing purchases with friends. The app was a flop. The only feature people used regularly was the ability to share images of your purchases with friends. Ben and Paul added Evan Sharp to the team and they decided to take that one feature - sharing images - and turn it into a full-fledged application. They launched in 2010 to a relatively slow start, but in 2011 they iPhone app launched and Pinterest became a hot commodity.


{blurb, icon: quote-left}
Leaps of greatness require the combined problem-solving ability of people who trust each other.

C> -- Simon Sinek
{/blurb}


{blurb, icon: quote-left}
One step at a time is all it takes to get you there.

C> -- Emily Dickinson
{/blurb}
